---
title: 最长单调子序列问题
date: 2012-03-22 17:19
categories: Introduction to Algorithm -third edition
tags:
    - LIS
    - 算法导论
    - 笔记
override_permailink: /algorithm/introductiontoalgorithm/最长单调子序列问题
mathjax: true
---

##### Exercises 15.4-5

> Give an \\(O(n^2)\\)-time algorithm to find the longest
> monotonically increasing subsequence of a sequence of *n* 
> numbers。
>
>-   Let X is the sequence of the sequence of n numbers.
>-   Let Y is the sorted number of the sequence of that n numbers.
>-   Find the LCS of the X and Y.

这种解法的核心在于问题的转化。求一个序列的最长单调子序列，先由其排序得一
个有序的序列。于是问题可以转化为求原序列和有序序列的[最长公共子序列][]。

一开始没想出来，网上搜到[Rip's Infernal Majesty][]的博客，茅塞顿开。

算法导论接下来的一题要求用*O*(*n*lg *n*)-求出最长子序列.。

#### Exercises 15.4-6: ⋆

> Give an *O*(*n* lg *n*)-time algorithm to find the longest
> monotonically increasing sub-sequence of a sequence of *n* numbers.
> (*Hint:* Observe that the last element of a candidate subsequence of
> length *i* is at least as large as the last element of a candidate
> subsequence of length *i* - 1. Maintain candidate subsequences by
> linking them through the input sequence.)

我头脑愚笨，加上今天确实有些头昏，有答案都没看懂，哎，贴出
[Rip's Infernal Majesty][]的答案，留待来日慢慢回味。

> We can solve the longest increasing subsequence problem using only
> arrays and binary search. It processes the sequence elements in order,
> for each new X[i], maintaining a candidate sequence S by:   
> • if X[i] is larger than the last element in S, add X[i] into S.   
> • otherwise, find the smallest element that is larger than X[i], S[k]
> < X[k] and X[i] ≤ S[k+1], replace S[k+1] with X[i].   
> After finishing processing all n numbers, the length of S is is length
> of LIS of X.  
> 
> 	LIS(X, n)   
> 	1 L = 0   
> 	2 for *i* = 1, 2, … n   
> 	3 binary search for the largest positive *j* ≤ L such that X[M[*j*]] <
> 	X[*i*] (or set *j* = 0 if no such value exists)   
> 	4 P[*i*] = M[*j*]   
> 	5 if *j* == L or X[*i*] < X[M[j+1]]   
> 	6 M[*j*+1] = *i*   
> 	7 L = max(L, *j*+1)   
>
> The algorithm stores values in two arrays:   
> • M[*j*] — stores the position *k* of the smallest value X[*k*] such
> that there is an increasing subsequence of length *j* ending at X[*k*]
> on the range *k* ≤ *i* (note we have *j* ≤ *k* ≤ *i* here).   
> • P[*k*] — stores the position of the predecessor of X[*k*] in the
> longest increasing subsequence ending at X[*k*].   
> L is the length of the longest increasing sequence. The actual longest
> sequence can be found by backtracking through the P array: the last
> item of the longest sequence is in X[M[L]], the second-to-last item is
> in X[P[M[L]]], etc. Thus, the sequence has the form   
> …, X[P[P[M[L]]]], X[P[M[L]]], X[M[L]].   
> Because the algorithm performs a single binary search per sequence
> element, its total time can be expressed using as O(*n* log *n*).

问题来自算法导论，参考博客：[Rip's Infernal Majesty][]

[最长公共子序列]: http://www.roading.org/algorithm/introductiontoalgorithm/%E6%9C%80%E9%95%BF%E5%85%AC%E5%85%B1%E5%AD%90%E5%BA%8F%E5%88%97.html
[Rip's Infernal Majesty]: http://ripcrixalis.blog.com/
